EGFR and MUC1 as dual-TAA drug targets for lung cancer and colorectal cancer

Background

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is a key protein in cellular signaling that is overexpressed in many human cancers, making it a compelling therapeutic target. On-target severe skin toxicity has limited its clinical application. Dual-targeting therapy represents a novel approach to overcome the challenges of EGFR-targeted therapies.

Methods

A single-cell tumor-normal RNA transcriptomic meta-atlas of lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and normal lung tissues was constructed from published data. Tumor associated antigens (TAAs) were screened from the genes which were expressed on cell surface and could distinguish cancer cells from normal cells. Expression of MUC1 and EGFR in tumors and normal tissues was detected by immunohistochemistry (IHC), bulk transcriptomic and single-cell transcriptomic analyses. RNA cut-off values were calculated using paired analysis of RNA sequencing and IHC in patient-derived tumor xenograft samples. They were used to estimate the abundance of EGFR- and MUC-positive subjects in The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) database. Survival analysis of EGFR and MUC1 expression was carried out using the transcription and clinical data from TCGA.

Results

A candidate TAA target, transmembrane glycoprotein mucin 1 (MUC1), showed strong expression in cancer cells and low expression in normal cells. Single-cell analysis suggested EGFR and MUC1 together had better tumor specificity than the combination of EGFR with other drug targets. IHC data confirmed that EGFR and MUC1 were highly expressed on LUAD and colorectal cancer (CRC) clinical samples but not on various normal tissues. Notably, co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 was observed in 98.4% (n=64) of patients with LUAD and in 91.6% (n=83) of patients with CRC. It was estimated that EGFR and MUC1 were expressed in 97.5% of LUAD samples in the TCGA dataset. Besides, high expression of EGFR and MUC1 was significantly associated with poor prognosis of LUAD and CRC patients.

Conclusions

Single-cell RNA, bulk RNA and IHC data demonstrated the high expression levels and co-expression patterns of EGFR and MUC1 in tumors but not normal tissues. Therefore, it is a promising TAA combination for therapeutic targeting which could enhance on-tumor efficacy while reducing off-tumor toxicity.

Introduction

Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), a tyrosine kinase receptor whose activation leads to receptor dimerization and tyrosine autophosphorylation, mediates tumor cell survival and proliferation in lung cancer, colorectal cancer (CRC) and breast cancer. Monoclonal antibody inhibitors of EGFR have been developed for cancer therapy in the last two decades, including cetuximab and necitumumab approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) and squamous cell lung cancer, and panitumumab and cetuximab approved by the FDA and European Medicines Agency (EMA) for the treatment of metastatic CRC. However, anti-EGFR therapy can be marred by chronic and disfiguring adverse reactions such as acne-like rash, abnormal hair growth, and ocular abnormalities, which could worsen life qualities of patients and even trigger treatment termination.

Tumor associated antigens (TAAs) are important tumor targets for drug development with abnormal expression on tumor cells. While drugs targeting single TAA faced obstacles such as on-target, off-tumor toxicity and antigen escape, strategies targeting dual TAAs could improve the selectivity of tumor cells and reduce drug toxicity, through stronger binding to tumor cells expressing dual TAAs rather than normal tissues expressing a single target. To find an optimal TAA target to combine with EGFR, we constructed a computational pipeline which integrated multiple single-cell RNA sequencing datasets of both tumor and normal tissues from public sources. From a pool of TAAs identified by single-cell analysis, transmembrane glycoprotein mucin 1 (MUC1) was distinguished as a candidate target with promising druggability, as affirmed by extensive literature review and evaluation of its therapeutic tractability.

Through analysis of an independent lung cancer single-cell dataset, we showed that co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 was specific to tumor cells in the tumor microenvironment. We then confirmed that the expression patterns of EGFR and MUC1 in tumor tissues by immunohistochemistry (IHC). EGFR and MUC1 were co-expressed in 63 (98.4%) of the 64 patients with LUAD and in 76 (91.6%) of the 83 patients with CRC. In addition, we performed paired analysis of RNA sequencing and IHC data of patient-derived tumor xenograft (PDX) samples, and estimated that EGFR and MUC1 were expressed in 97.5% of LUAD samples of The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) database. High expression of EGFR and MUC1 was associated with poor prognosis in LUAD and CRC. Together, our results illustrated the expression patterns of EGFR and MUC1 in tumor and normal tissues, and suggested that they were promising drug targets for developing cancer therapies targeting dual TAAs.

Results

TAA screening based on single-cell meta-atlas

To identify TAA targets, we constructed a tumor-normal single cell meta-atlas via integrating multiple single-cell transcriptome datasets of primary lung tumors and normal lung tissues for analysis ( Figure 1A ). The ECF of each gene was compared with the average expression level for tumor and normal cell populations, and the genes that contributed most to distinguishing between individual malignant and normal tissues were selected by random forest analysis. Feature importance (FI) was gauged through the metric of ‘mean decrease in accuracy,’ a measure that reflected the model’s proficiency in aligning the surfaceome expression profiles with the initial labels of tumor or normal as annotated by our meta-atlas. The top 100 genes with the highest FI were selected for detailed literature review, with various aspects taken into consideration, such as drug developmental status, signaling pathway, gene expression and mutations. Among them MUC1 was finally selected with low expression in various normal cell types for subsequent evaluation ( Figures 1B, C ).

Single-cell analysis confirmed the co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 in tumor cells

We performed single-cell analysis based on data from an independent study to validate the co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 in cancer cells, as well as in other cells of the tumor microenvironment. We used the cut-off of raw count values > 0 to define co-expression of genes at single-cell transcriptomic level. Co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 in malignant cells and stromal cells, including fibroblasts, endothelial cells, normal epithelial cells and immune cells (conventional CD4 T cells, CD8 T cells, exhausted CD8+ T cells, proliferating T cells, NK cells, monocytes or macrophages) was estimated. Co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 in stromal cells was lower than 10% (mostly under 5%) in any patient ( Figure 2 ;  Supplementary Table 3 ). By contrast, 44% of LUAD patients had more than 10% EGFR and MUC1 co-expression in malignant cells, which was significantly higher than the co-expression percentages in other cell populations (P-value = 2.088e-10). The co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 was higher in tumor cells than EGFR combined with targets under active drug development for lung cancer such as MET, HER3 (ERBB3) or Trop2 (TACSTD2) ( Figure 2 ), suggesting the potential safety advantage of developing therapies targeting EGFR and MUC1.

IHC analysis of MUC1 and EGFR expression in normal tissues and tumor samples

To examine the protein levels of MUC1 and EGFR in normal tissues, we conducted IHC on a panel of tissue samples from different anatomic sites ( Table 1 ). IHC method for EGFR and MUC1 was established and optimized by screening the most specific primary antibody and testing appropriate antibody concentration ( Supplementary Figure 1 ). EGFR showed positive staining in skin, liver, testicle, prostate, adrenal gland and esophagus, while MUC1 displayed more restricted staining in lung, breast, kidney and stomach ( Figure 3 ). Importantly, the data suggested that these two targets were not co-existed in any normal tissues, which is crucial to minimize potential on-target, off-tumor toxicity.

As aberrant expression of EGFR and MUC1 has been reported in various epithelial tumors, we carried out IHC experiments on LUAD, CRC and breast cancer tissues ( Table 2 ). EGFR generally showed the membranous staining pattern, while MUC1 exhibited both membranous and cytoplasmic patterns, consistent with previous reports ( Figure 4A ). Of the 64 clinical LUAD samples analyzed, EGFR protein expression was observed in 63 (98.4%) cases, and MUC1 were stained positive in all of the samples. Among CRC clinical samples, 79 (95.2%) and 81 (97.6%) were positive for EGFR and MUC1, respectively. As EGFR and MUC1 were stained in consecutive sections with a thickness of 4 μm, which was smaller than the averaged diameter of tumor cells (7-20 μm in most cases), we could observe if they were co-expressed in the same tumor cells ( Figure 4B ). Roughly, EGFR and MUC1 were detected on the same tumor cells in 63 (98.4%) LUAD and 76 (91.6%) CRC samples, which included samples with at least 1% of tumor cells stained positive with both EGFR and MUC1 regardless of staining intensity.

The H-score, which was the sum of the staining intensities multiplied by their corresponding cell percentages, averaged 207.7 (EGFR) and 285.9 (MUC1) in LUAD and 87.6 (EGFR) and 158.3 (MUC1) in CRC ( Figures 4C–F ). Using H-score ≥100 and H-score ≥200 as the cut-off values for medium and high expression of each protein, medium levels of EGFR and MUC1 were found in 54 (84.3%) LUAD and 19 (22.9%) CRC samples ( Supplementary Figure 2 ). Furthermore, 60.9% of LUAD and 3.6% of CRC samples showed high levels of EGFR and MUC1 ( Supplementary Figure 2 ). However, the staining intensity and percentage of EGFR were much weaker in breast cancer samples which were therefore not used for the following analysis ( Figures 4C, E ).

Taken together, IHC analysis demonstrated that EGFR and MUC1 were present at medium to high levels in the majority of LUAD and CRC samples, and in line with single-cell analysis, they tended to be co-expressed on tumor cells. Moreover, they did not show high expression or co-existence patterns in normal tissues.

EGFR-MUC1 as dual-TAA targets could potentially cover a large population of NSCLC patients

To estimate the size of patient population with EGFR and MUC1 expression using TCGA database, we calculated the cut-off values of RNA expression corresponding to the positivity of EGFR and MUC1 protein levels. We used PDX samples due to their similarity to primary tumors, and obtained RNA sequencing and IHC staining results of the same PDX samples. In 24 and 62 PDX samples of LUAD and CRC respectively, the staining patterns of EGFR and MUC1 were similar to those in primary clinical samples ( Figures 5A, B ). 100% LUAD samples (mean H-score=262) and CRC samples (mean H-score=174) were positive for EGFR, while 95.8% LUAD samples (mean H-score=202) and 100% CRC samples (mean H-score=178) were positive for MUC1 ( Figures 5C, D ). The cut-off log2(TPM+1) values were determined to predict IHC positivity through ROC curve analysis, in which a larger AUC indicated a better predictive performance (a higher consistency between TPM and H-score).  Figures 5E, F  showed the ROC curves and the AUC values for LUAD PDX samples, illustrating a high AUC value (0.97 by H-score >0) for EGFR, a medium AUC value (0.6 by H-score >0) for MUC1 in LUAD, and a low AUC value for both EGFR and MUC1 in CRC (data not shown). Therefore, we proceeded with analyses of EGFR and MUC1 in LUAD.

We estimated the optimal threshold value of RNA expression referring to protein positivity (H-score >0) by the roc function in the R package “pROC” as the cut-off. The log2(TPM + 1) cutoff points of 2.23 for EGFR and 1.5 for MUC1 ( Figures 5E, F ) were applied in the TCGA database to define positivity. Consistent with our above results, 504 of 517 (97.5%) LUAD samples were positive for EGFR, and MUC1 protein expression was positive in 517 cases (100%). Thus, the proportion of tumor samples positive with EGFR and MUC1 was estimated to be 97.5% ( Figure 5G ), which indicated that a large population of LUAD patients could potentially benefit from EGFR-MUC1 dual-targeting therapies.

EGFR and MUC1 corelated with poor prognosis of LUAD and CRC patients

To further evaluate the clinical significance of EGFR and MUC1 expression, we analyzed the correlation between EGFR and MUC1 expression and the prognosis of LUAD and CRC patients through Kaplan-Meier survival curves. To predict the effect of EGFR and MUC1 on the survival of individuals who might need biological treatments, patients with advanced tumor stages (TNM tumor stage III/IV) from TCGA database were selected for the survival analysis. In LUAD patients, although there was no significant difference, we observed that high expression of EGFR or MUC1 alone was corelated with reduced overall survival (OS) and disease-free interval (DFI) ( Supplementary Figures 3A–D ). Furthermore, LUAD patients with high expression of both EGFR and MUC1 had significantly worse prognosis than other patients ( Figures 6A, B , p-value=0.033 for OS, p-value=0.027 for DFI). In CRC patients, prognosis of patients with high EGFR or MUC1 expression alone was slightly worse than low expression ( Supplementary Figures 3E–H ), while the prognosis of patients with high expression of both EGFR and MUC1 was significantly worse than that of patients with low expression levels of both targets ( Figures 6C, D , p-value=0.045 for OS, p-value=0.053 for DFI). These results suggested high expression of EGFR-MUC1 might serve as a prognostic factor for LUAD and CRC patients, and development of dual- targeting therapies might provide effective treatment options for patients with late stage LUAD or CRC.

Discussion

The EGFR-dependent pathway has an important role in epithelial cancer biology, which has led to the development of cetuximab and necitumumab. However, severe skin toxicity, most likely due to the expression of EGFR in normal epithelium, hinders the widespread use of these drugs. To increase tumor selectivity and reduce tumor escape, dual-targeting therapies using antibodies, antibody-drug conjugates (ADCs) or chimeric antigen receptor T cells have emerged, as targeting two TAAs simultaneously might better distinguish tumor cells from normal cells.

In this work, we screened TAA targets using a single-cell analysis pipeline, and found a potential target MUC1 with high expression in tumor cells and relatively low or undetectable expression in normal tissues. MUC1 is a glycoprotein involved in the proliferation, metabolism, metastasis and invasion of multiple tumor types, and overexpressed in various epithelial cancers with aberrant glycosylation. As MUC1 protein was confined to the apical surface of epithelial cells under normal physiological conditions, it was distributed all over the cell surface and within the cytoplasm in tumor cells, which might improve the safety of drugs targeting MUC1. Thus, MUC1 presented unique properties in cancer cells, including the aberrant glycosylation pattern, loss of polarity and overexpression, making it an attractive TAA target. However, the clinical efficacy of monotherapy targeting MUC1 was much lower than expected. The glyco-engineered humanized monoclonal antibody PankoMab-GEX showed no difference from placebo for the primary endpoint of progression-free survival. One possible reason could be that these anti-MUC1 antibodies were developed to target the N-terminal subunit (MUC1-N) which was usually shed from the cell surface and released into the peripheral blood. The detached MUC1-N attached to antibodies and prevented them from binding to surface MUC1.

Several studies have demonstrated that MUC1 drove EGFR expression and signaling in different cellular contexts. Through its C-terminus, MUC1 stimulated EGFR promoter activation, thereby increasing EGF-dependent signaling, spheroid survival and cellular proliferation. Furthermore, knockout of MUC1 in tumor cells resulted in higher sensitivity to EGFR inhibitors, and activated EGFR stimulated MUC1 expression in human uterine and pancreatic cancer cell lines. Therefore, it is predicted that EGFR-MUC1 dual-targeting therapies could improve the response of tumor cells, and analysis of EGFR and MUC1 co-expression patterns in clinical samples are essential to provide a solid rationale for drug development.

We investigated the expression patterns of EGFR and MUC1 in patients with LUAD and CRC by IHC, and observed high expression of EGFR and MUC1 in tumor tissues. In contrast, there was lower expression of both proteins in various normal tissues. In line with previous studies, co-expression of EGFR and MUC1 in the same tumor cells was found in most cases, including 63 (98.4%) LUAD and 76 (91.6%) CRC samples. Using the RNA cut-off values for EGFR and MUC1 positivity, we estimated that 97.5% of LUAD patients expressed EGFR and MUC1 based on the 517 cases’ data from TCGA, which suggested that EGFR and MUC1 expression was prevalent in LUAD patients. Furthermore, high expression of EGFR and MUC1 was prognostic for poor survival of LUAD and CRC patients.

There are some limitations in our study. Firstly, as we showed the expression patterns of EGFR and MUC1 in a panel of normal tissues and various tumor tissues, the sample size was still limited to achieve a thorough comparison between tumor and normal tissues. A larger collection of normal samples and tumor samples with paired tumor-adjacent tissues need to be examined to better elucidate the potential toxicity of targeting EGFR and MUC1. Secondly, we did not show experimental data to confirm the efficacy and safety of dual-targeting strategy in this study, while other companies have reported their preclinical data on bispecific ADCs targeting EGFR and MUC1 recently, which suggested the great therapeutic potential of dual-targeting drugs for cancers co-expressing EGFR and MUC1, as well as EGFR- or MUC1- expressing tumors.

In summary, through a generalizable pipeline for screening TAAs by single-cell transcriptomic and IHC analysis, MUC1 was selected as a candidate target to combine with EGFR, as to increase the tumor specificity over normal cells. We demonstrated that EGFR and MUC1 were co-expressed on tumor cells in the majority of LUAD and CRC clinical samples. High expression of EGFR and MUC1 was corelated with unfavorable prognosis of LUAD and CRC patients. Given that EGFR and MUC1 expression was present in a large patient population, our work has shed light on the prospects of developing EGFR-MUC1 dual-targeting therapies, such as bispecific antibodies and ADCs, which might broaden the tumor selectivity while reducing the side-effects on normal organs.

Data availability statement

The public datasets used in this study are available in the TCGA database (), ArrayExpress database (), and Tissue Stability Cell Atlas (). The details can be found in the article and its  Supplementary Materials .

Ethics statement

The studies involving humans were approved by Shanxi Province Cancer Hospital. The studies were conducted in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements. The participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study. The animal study was approved by Shanxi Province Cancer Hospital. The study was conducted in accordance with the local legislation and institutional requirements.

Author contributions

HC: Investigation, Project administration, Validation, Writing – review & editing. QY: Investigation, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing. QX: Project administration, Visualization, Investigation, Writing – review & editing. LZ: Investigation, Methodology, Validation, Writing – review & editing. WY: Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – review & editing. YY: Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – review & editing. ST: Formal analysis, Validation, Writing – review & editing. CLin: Project administration, Visualization, Writing – original draft. YZ: Data curation, Software, Visualization, Writing – review & editing. RZS: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. YM: Resources, Writing – review & editing. NY: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. HW: Resources, Writing – review & editing. FC: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. ML: Methodology, Writing – review & editing. JM: Resources, Writing – review & editing. CLiao: Conceptualization, Resources, Supervision, Writing – original draft. RFS: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Resources, Supervision, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

Conflict of interest

Authors QX, LZ, WY, YY, ST, CLin, YZ, and CLiao were employed by the company Shanghai Shengdi Medicine Co. Ltd.

The remaining authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of interest.

Publisher’s note

All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher.

Supplementary material

The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fonc.2024.1433033/full#supplementary-material
