Autoantibodies against tumor-associated antigens in sputum as biomarkers for lung cancer

Highlights

It is important to develop biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer.

By probing a protein microarray containing more than 9000 antigens with sputum of lung cancer patients and cancer-free smokers, we identified 28 lung tumor antigens (TAs).

A panel of three TA-associated autoantibody (TAAb) biomarkers was further developed that had 81% sensitivity and 83% specificity for diagnosis of lung cancer.

This study provides the first evidence for the potential of sputum TAAbs as biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer.

Tumor antigens (TAs) can initiate host immune responses and produce TA-associated autoantibody (TAAbs), potential cancer biomarkers. Sputum is directly generated from the upper and lower airways, and thus can be used as a surrogate sample for the diagnosis of lung cancer based on molecular analysis. To develop sputum TAAb biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer, the leading cause of cancer death, we probed a protein microarray containing more than 9,000 antigens with sputum supernatants of a discovery set of 30 lung cancer patients and 30 cancer-free smokers. Twenty-eight TAs with higher reactivity in sputum of lung cancer cases vs. controls were identified. The diagnostic significance of TAAbs against the TAs was determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs) in sputum of the discovery set and additional 166 lung cancer patients and 213 cancer-free smokers (validation set). Three sputum TAAbs against DDX6, ENO1, and 14–3-3ζ were developed as a biomarker panel with 81% sensitivity and 83% specificity for diagnosis of lung cancer, regardless of stages, locations, and histological types of lung tumors. This study provides the first evidence that sputum TAAbs could be used as biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer.

Introduction

Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths, accounting for 28% of all cancer deaths . 85% of lung tumors are non-small cell lung cancers (NSCLCs), which comprise two major histological subtypes: squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) and adenocarcinoma (AC). Given that the 5-year survival rate depends on the stage of lung cancer, the early detection of NSCLC is clinically important. Efforts have been made to develop tumor cells-derived proteins as circulating cell-free (e.g., serum or plasma) biomarkers for lung cancer. For instance, analysis of CEA, CYFRA-21-2, SFTBP57, EGFR, ProGRP58, and Ciz159 proteins in plasma showed promise for the diagnosis of lung cancer. However, since the circulating tumor proteins that are released from the cancer cells are few and diluted in a large serum or plasma volume, the sensitivity of the circulating cell-free molecular biomarkers in blood is very low, particularly for the early stages of NSCLC.

Self-proteins (antigens) of tumors can be affected by specific point mutations, misfolding, overexpression, aberrant glycosylation, truncation, or aberrant degradation. The tumor antigens (TAs) elicit immune responses and stimulate TA-associated autoantibodies (TAAbs) before or during tumor formation, which may provide biomarkers for the diagnosis of cancer. Compared with the TAs, TAAbs have several benefits as biomarkers. First, although the TAs are usually at an undetectable level in body fluids, the TAAbs response to the TAs are often amplified in the immune responses, and hence more easily detectable. Second, as opposed to TAs that are frequently transiently elevated in body fluids, the corresponding TAAbs are relatively lasting, and thus are more stable and readily detected. Third, TAAbs are highly specific and handily detectable in small volumes of specimens with well-established secondary reagents. Indeed, the potential use of determination of TAAbs in serum or plasma for the diagnosis of lung cancer was demonstrated. For example, a serum based-earlyCDT-lung assay that consisted of six TAAbs against p53, NY-ESO-1, CAGE, GBU4–5, Annexin 1, and SOX2 could detect lung cancer with 38% sensitivity and 88% specificity. However, the sensitivity of the serum TAAb biomarkers was not sufficient for the early diagnosis of lung cancer in the clinical settings.

Sputum is coughed up from the lower airways and deep lungs, and hence could act as a mirror to pulmonary diseases. Sputum essentially consists of cellular and liquid fractions. The cellular portion contains exfoliated airway epithelial cells from the bronchial tree. We and others have shown that genetic and epigenetic analyses of exfoliated respiratory epithelial cells could provide an approach for the early detection of lung cancer. The liquid fraction of sputum is complex dilute aqueous solution of lipids, glycoconjugates, and plasma-derived mediators and proteins. In contrast with the epithelial cells exfoliated from local respiratory tract sites, sputum supernatant comprises the liquid portion that is produced by the cells lining the bronchi and airways where NSCLCs are immersed in the bio-fluid. Furthermore, sputum supernatant may comprise local- and systemic-derivative lung TAs and the corresponding TAAbs, which raises the rationale for using sputum as a diagnostic medium for detection of NSCLC with TAAb biomarkers. Therefore, we hypothesized that the analysis of TAAbs in sputum may provide an alternative means for the noninvasive diagnosis of lung cancer. The objective of this study was to validate the hypothesis by identifying and developing TAAb biomarkers in sputum for the early detection of NSCLC.

Results

TAs of lung cancer in sputum identified by protein microarrays

The lowest average background in sputum was 482 relative fluorescence units (RFUs), and the highest average background was 517 RFUs. Mean background signal values on the arrays were within the expected range for all sputum samples. Furthermore, signal used values for protein (antigen) features reached the scanner maximum of ∼65,000 RFU, indicating a dynamic range >2 logs. Therefore, the experiments and data acquisition of the microarray analysis were performed under optimal conditions. Altogether, 28 TAs (Table 3) were identified that showed significantly differential signal intensities between lung cancer patients and cancer-free smokers with a p< 0.05 and signal intensity ratio of two groups being greater than 3.0. Among the 28 antigens, 26 or two displayed increased or decreased levels in lung cancer cases vs. cancer-free smokers, respectively.

Validation of the identified lung TAs by ELISA in sputum

From the 28 antigens, 8 antigens (Tables 3 and 4) were chosen for subsequent ELISA validation based on criteria: 1) having differential signals between the two populations with a p ≤ 0.01 and, 2) having signal intensity ratio between the two populations being >10.0. ELISA was first performed in sputum samples of the discovery set that was used in the protein microarray analysis. Of the 8 TAs tested, seven or one had augmented or reduced interaction levels with TAAbs in sputum of lung cancer cases vs. cancer-free smokers, respectively (All p < 0.01). The tested TAs by ELISA displayed the same significant direction as by protein array (All p < 0.01) (Table 4). To further validate the TAs, we analyzed TAAbs against the 8 TAs in a validation set with a relatively large sample size that consisted of 166 patients diagnosed with lung cancer in different stages, locations, and histological types and 213 cancer-free smokers. Consistent with data observed in discovery set, the TAAbs in validation set displayed a considerably different level in sputum of lung cancer patients vs. control subjects (All p < 0.01).

Development of sputum TAAb biomarkers for lung cancer

We evaluated the potential of using TAAbs against the 8 TAs for diagnosis of NSCLC in the 166 cases and 213 controls. The TAAbs exhibited AUC values of 0.66–0.81 in distinguishing NSCLC patients from cancer-free smokers with 60–74% sensitivities and 60–78% specificities (Fig. 1 and Table 5). We used a stepwise logistic regression model to select the optimal panel of biomarkers. Three TAAbs, which were against DDX6, ENO1, and 14-3-3ζ respectively, were selected as the best biomarkers in a panel. The optimal cutoff for the combined biomarkers was U = 0.3628, where U=−6.2573+1.3529*log (DDX6)-1.9647*log (ENO1)+2.3165*14-3-3ζ. Any subject with U≥0.3628 was classified as a NSCLC case. The combined use of the three TAAbs produced 0.88 AUC in distinguishing NSCLC patients from the controls, which was significantly higher than that of any single one (p < 0.05) (Fig. 1). Furthermore, the analysis of the three biomarkers produced 81% sensitivity and 83% specificity for diagnosis of NSCLC (Table 5). Interestingly, combined analysis of the three TAAbs did not display a statistical difference between stages, locations, and histological types of lung cancer (All p > 0.05). Furthermore, the prevalence of the biomarkers was related with pack-years of smoking (p < 0.05), however, not associated with patient age and gender.

Discussion

Since sputum is directly secreted from the lower airways and deep lungs where lung tumors exist, it has the advantages as surrogate material over serum or plasma for specifically diagnosing lung cancer. First, sampling of sputum is simple and does not require trained health care professionals. Second, sputum is microbiologically stabilized after the collection. Third, the collection can be done anywhere, including at home. Fourth, large numbers of sputum samples can be collected rapidly, and therefore, are particularly useful for screening a large number of high-risk individuals or for usage in decentralized regions. Finally, and most importantly, since sputum originates from the deep lungs where lung tumors are immersed in the biofluid, sputum may constitute a direct source of TAAb biomarkers for the early detection of NSCLC.

In this study, we first comprehensively profiled proteins in sputum using microarray and identified TAs in sputum of lung cancer patients. Sputum TAAbs against TAs (DDX6, ENO1, and 14-3-3ζ) were further developed as a biomarker panel that had 81% sensitivity and 83% specificity for diagnosis of lung cancer. In addition, the observed TAAb responses were independent of patients’ characteristics, including race, gender, and tumor stage and type, suggesting that the sputum TAAb biomarkers could be used for equally detecting the major types of NSCLC at the early stages, regardless of locations of the primary tumors.

ENO1 exists on the surface of cells and has important functions in cell migration and tissue invasion. Activated ENO1 has a direct coupling to glycolytic activity. Furthermore, ENO1 is upregulated by HIF1α in response to hypoxia. We have found that ENO1 gene has increased levels in both genomic copy number and transcript in lung cancer cells compared with normal cells, and its dysregulation is involved in lung tumorigenesis. Furthermore, we developed a panel of six genomic probes including one targeting ENO1 gene that could be analyzed in the exfoliated airway epithelial cells of sputum for lung cancer detection. Moreover, our previous study revealed that ELISA analysis of ENO1 protein in sputum supernatant had a diagnostic value in distinguishing patients with stage I lung cancer from cancer-free individuals.

14–3–3ζ is a family of cellular proteins and could interact with other crucial cellular proteins involved in the tumor development and progression. We previously found that increased 14-3-3ζ protein level was positively associated with stage and grading of NSCLC and inversely related to poor outcomes of the patients. Furthermore, lung cancer cells with down-regulation of 14-3-3ζ were more sensitive to cisplatin in vitro that was associated with the inhibition of cell proliferation, additive G2-M cell cycle arrest, and increased apoptosis. In addition, 14-3-3ζ might act as a proto-oncogene and have oncogenic function in the development of NSCLC tumorigenesis. Interestingly, Qiu et al. previously showed that the occurrence serum TAAb to 14-3-3ζ was one of the three biomarkers that could precede onset of symptoms and diagnosis of lung cancer.

We are interested to find that TAAb against DDX6 (also named RCK/p54) is one of the biomarkers in the panel. DDX6 is a member of the family of DEAD/H-box RNA helicases and associated with t(11;14)(q23;q32) chromosomal translocation in B-cell lymphoma cell line RC-K8. DDX6 has numerous functions, including translation initiation, pre-mRNA splicing, ribosome assembly by acting as an RNA-binding protein. It also contributes to the proliferation and differentiation of the stem and progenitor cells. However, functions of DDX6 in lung carcinogenesis are largely unknown. Herein we show that DDX6 might be a novel TA and detection of the corresponding TAAb in sputum could help diagnose NSCLC at the early stage. Furthermore, the TAAbs are not only noble candidates for the early detection of NSCLC but potential targets for therapeutic intervention of the malignancy.

Although showing promise, the TAAb biomarkers developed in this study are still limited in their sensitivity (81%) and specificity (83%) for diagnosis of lung cancer. We are extensively evaluating all the 28 TAs defined by the protein microarray in a large case-control study to identify additional TAAb biomarkers that can be added to the three so that the diagnostic efficacy of the approach could be improved. Furthermore, it will be useful in the future to combine the TAAb biomarkers with other types of molecular biomarkers, such as DNA and microRNAs, in sputum to create a combined panel with better diagnostic characteristics. In addition, given that the TAs in sputum and blood might have diverse roles in the carcinogenesis of NSCLC through various mechanisms, further comparing sputum and serum ATTb biomarkers for the diagnostic values and determining if their integration would have a synergistic influence on detection of NSCLC is warranted.

The overall 5-year survival rate for stage I NSCLC patients who are typically treated with surgery remains up to 83%. In contrast, only 5–15% and less than 2% of patients with stage III and IV NSCLC are alive after five years. These statistics provide the primary rationale to develop biomarker that can improve NSCLC early detection. Furthermore, the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) shows that low-dose CT (LDCT) could detect NSCLC at the early stage and significantly reduce the mortality. However, 25% of smokers screened by LDCT have indeterminate pulmonary nodules (PNs), of which 96% are benign growths. LDCT screening for lung cancer often produces a high false-positive rate and over-diagnosis. Therefore, many patients with benign PNs will undergo harmful diagnostic and therapeutic procedures, presenting a major clinical challenge. The ability to immediately and precisely distinguish malignant from benign PNs at baseline LDCT screening is an unmet need. The TAAb biomarkers might have two important applications. First, they could be used for the early detection of lung cancer patients in high-risk populations (e.g., heavy smokers). Second, the use of the biomarkers in LDCT-based lung cancer screening would i), spare individuals with benign growths from radiation exposure and unnecessary surgical resections or biopsies, and ii), lead to more personalized therapy by enabling effective treatments to be immediately initiated for lung cancer, and hence reduce lung cancer-associated mortality.

In conclusion, using protein microarray together with ELISA, we developed three TAAbs as a small panel of sputum biomarkers for the early detection of lung cancer. The findings from this study may lay the basis to perform a next step to a new diagnostic approach that might have future clinical utility.

Declaration of Competing Interest

The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
